At rallies in the last weeks of his presidential campaign, Donald Trump told his supporters "my plan ends illegal immigration and suspends immigration from terror problem regions" and that "we will stop illegal immigration, deport all criminal aliens... and it will happen within the first week of my presidency."
It may not be happening that quickly, but it looks like Trump's tough immigration policy is starting to take shape.
Trump's team is working on plans for a program that would track immigrants traveling to the US from high-risk countries, a source familiar with the process told CNN.
The source says it will be similar to a program initiated after 9/11, called the called the NSEERS program (National Security Entry-Exit program), which folded five years ago. It did not suspend immigration from those countries, but rather required an additional layer of screening for people coming from countries inhabited by known terrorists, like Iraq, Syria and Afghanistan—all Muslim-majority nations. The screening included extensive interviews, fingerprinting, and for some, monthly checks.
The program being mentioned now was blasted by civil rights activists, and the ACLU told CNN in an interview this week that NSEERS "actually made genuine efforts at trying to combat terrorism more difficult by destroying relationships with immigrant communities and actually negatively impacting the ability of the federal government to cooperate with foreign governments in fighting terrorism."
The program also ignores data, compiled by groups like The New America Foundation, which shows most domestic terror attacks are carried out by US-born or naturalized citizens.
A DHS inspector generals' report in 2012 called the program "obsolete," "unreliable" and an "inefficient use of resources."

A Muslim ban
A registry for people from these countries is the latest iteration of a Trump proposal that began with a shocking call in December 2015 when he said he wanted "a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States until our country's representatives can figure out what is going on."
That bold claim has become more muddled over time after Trump came under fire for nakedly targeting an entire religion.
As for Trump's developing policy, the source did not specify how many or which countries would considered high-risk but said "it's a moving target" given the ISIS threat. Not all countries with large Muslim populations are part of the current list, according to this source, who added that a complete ban of immigrants from high-risk countries is "something we're prepared for, but it's unlikely ... all options are on the table."
Last year, in response to a reporter's question, Trump said he would "certainly implement" a database on all Muslims living in the US. When pressed by other reporters, Trump later said he was in favor of a database tracking Syrian refugees in the US, though he never ruled out a broader Muslim ban.
The Trump transition team denied Thursday that he ever advocated for a registry.
"President-elect Trump has never advocated for any registry or system that tracks individuals based on their religion, and to imply otherwise is completely false," spokesman Jason Miller said. "The national registry of foreign visitors from countries with high terrorism activity that was in place during the Bush and Obama administrations gave intelligence and law enforcement communities additional tools to keep our country safe, but the President-elect plans on releasing his own vetting policies after he is sworn in."