Top Republicans involved with Congress’s budget process are worried about the daunting task of funding the government twice next year.

Leaders of both the House Appropriations and Budget committees fretted Thursday about the breakneck pace they’ll need to take with spending bills next year. Still, House Appropriations Committee Chairman Hal Rogers (R-Ky.) believes it can be done.

The House GOP conference decided in a closed-door meeting Thursday morning to push back all major government spending negotiations until March. In the meantime, they will approve a short-term bill funding the government.

The decision to avoid any late deal-making with President Obama was requested by the incoming Donald Trump administration and cheered by hard-line conservatives. But it will create a major wrinkle in Trump’s first 100 days as president, with spending bills eating up floor time that could be used for other legislation.

GOP lawmakers will be writing ambitious, rider-packed spending bills in what Trump hopes will be the most productive period of his presidency. He’s already vowed to wade into the biggest political minefields in politics: immigration and healthcare.

Republican lawmakers now have to hammer out a massive spending package, over the objections of Senate Democrats, and get it to Trump’s desk by the end of March or face a shutdown.

That period directly overlaps with the time that the House Appropriations Committee would normally spend drafting its 12 appropriations bills for the following year.

“[The continuing resolution] is going until March 31, which is deep into our 2018 floor schedule, so it’s going to be busy,” Rogers said, repeating his preference for a larger funding package in December.

Rogers and other senior appropriations have long warned against a short-term bill, urging lawmakers to “clear the decks” for the Trump administration’s agenda in early 2017.

“Obviously I would have preferred to not do a [continuing resolution] now and get it behind us. But the Trump people preferred that we do a CR, so we’ll make it work,” Rogers said.

Next year’s appropriations work is likely to be a major test for a conference that was so divided over a budget blueprint this spring that they skipped it altogether.

This year, the House GOP will have to approve a budget if they want a shot with the tactic called reconciliation, which allows certain spending bills to pass the Senate with 51 votes.

Both the House and Senate will have to agree to the budget resolution in full, including the instructions on how to use reconciliation. There are several major agenda items that Republican leaders might target in reconciliation, including ObamaCare, tax reform and Medicare.

Price and others are even considering trying to take a second shot at reconciliation by bringing back this year’s budget resolution in January — an unprecedented step that would allow Republicans to get points on the board with ObamaCare repeal early in Trump’s presidency.

For the 2018 fiscal year, the budget resolution deadline is April 15 — about two weeks after the House and Senate will have to agree to the 2017 spending levels.

Rep. Tom Cole (R-Okla.), who sits on both the appropriations and budget committees, said finishing up the appropriations bills this year would have been far easier. It would have allowed more time for reconciliation and for the 12 spending bills.
