President-elect Donald Trump has vowed to drastically alter the U.S.’s direction on climate and energy. His promises include actions like “canceling” the Paris agreement and dismantling the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as well as repealing restrictions on domestic energy development. Trump infamously tweeted that global warming is a “hoax,” and has selected Myron Ebell of the conservative Competitive Enterprise Institute’s Center for Energy and Environment, an outspoken climate skeptic, to lead his EPA transition team. He has sworn to make some of these changes early on, even within his first 100 days in office.
The president-elect will not have as much power as his declarations suggest. Many of his plans will take a huge amount of time and energy—and sometimes, the cooperation of Congress. He is also likely to encounter countless lawsuits and bureaucratic roadblocks that will frustrate his efforts. 
Trump will have another option if he doesn’t want to wait four years: He could pull out of the U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) with an executive order, which would simultaneously withdraw the U.S. from the Paris agreement. It would take only one year to complete, although it is viewed as a more drastic move.
The Trump administration will also have the choice to simply ignore U.S. emission targets under the Paris agreement—the accord does not include any formal punishment for countries that do not meet their goals. Pulling out of one or any international treaties or ignoring their mandates would likely damage the U.S.’s relationship with the international community. 
Although the energy industry must follow EPA or Interior rules, the president has sway over how strictly they are enforced—which means Trump could decide to weakly implement some of the Obama regulations. Or if Trump decides to change or revoke the current rules, he would not need Congress’s approval to do so.
Finalized regulations have already gone through the agency rulemaking process, including a notice and comment period—which takes at least a year, if not several. In order to change or rescind a final rule, Trump’s EPA or Interior Department would have to go through the same process as well. Trump, however, could easily kill any rules that are not yet finalized.
Although this means Trump still has the power to revoke regulations for the energy industry, it is also likely that environmental groups and others will sue the administration for changing the rules, experts say. Lawsuits mean time, energy and rationale on the part of the Trump administration.
One of the biggest targets in Trump's sight is the Clean Power Plan, which requires power plants across the country to cut their carbon emissions. It is an EPA rule, finalized August 2015. As Scientific American reported, the rule would be difficult to undo, although it still has an uncertain future; it is currently being challenged in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. If the D.C. court has not made its decision by the time Trump takes office, his administration could ask the court to send the case back to the EPA so it can rework the rule. 
Trump has also said he would end the moratorium on new federal coal leases, revive the Keystone XL pipeline, and take other actions to promote energy development—all actions that would impact public lands.
