What follows is my 100-day action plan to Make America Great Again. contract between myself and the American voter – and begins with restoring honesty, accountability and change to Washington
first day of my term of office, my administration will immediately pursue the following six measures to clean up the corruption and special interest collusion in Washington, DC:
Constitutional Amendment to impose term limits on all members of Congress;
hiring freeze on all federal employees to reduce federal workforce through attrition (exempting military, public safety, and public health);
requirement that for every new federal regulation, two existing regulations must be eliminated;
5 year-ban on White House and Congressional officials becoming lobbyists after they leave government service;
lifetime ban on White House officials lobbying on behalf of a foreign government;
complete ban on foreign lobbyists raising money for American elections.
On the same day, protect American workers:
announce my intention to renegotiate NAFTA or withdraw from the deal under Article 2205
announce our withdrawal from the Trans-Pacific Partnership
direct my Secretary of the Treasury to label China a currency manipulator
direct the Secretary of Commerce and U.S. Trade Representative to identify all foreign trading abuses that unfairly impact American workers 
will lift the restrictions on the production of $50 trillion dollars’ worth of job-producing American energy reserves, including shale, oil, natural gas and clean coal.
lift the Obama-Clinton roadblocks and allow vital energy infrastructure projects, like the Keystone Pipeline, to move forward
cancel billions in payments to U.N. climate change programs and use the money to fix America’s water and environmental infrastructure
on the first day, I will take the following five actions to restore security and the constitutional rule of law:
cancel every unconstitutional executive action, memorandum and order issued by President Obama
begin the process of selecting a replacement for Justice Scalia from one of the 20 judges on my list, who will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States
cancel all federal funding to Sanctuary Cities
begin removing the more than 2 million criminal illegal immigrants from the country and cancel visas to foreign countries that won’t take them back
suspend immigration from terror-prone regions where vetting cannot safely occur. All vetting of people coming into our country will be considered extreme vetting.
work with Congress to introduce legislative measures fight for their passage 
Middle Class Tax Relief And Simplification Act. An economic plan, grow the economy 4% per year and create at least 25 million new jobs 
End The Offshoring Act Establishes tariffs to discourage companies from laying off their workers in order to relocate in other countries and ship their products back to the U.S. tax-free.
American Energy & Infrastructure Act. Leverages public-private partnerships, and private investments through tax incentives, to spur $1 trillion in infrastructure investment over 10 years. 
School Choice And Education Opportunity Act. Redirects education dollars 
Repeal and Replace Obamacare Act. 
Affordable Childcare and Eldercare Act. 
End Illegal Immigration Act Fully-funds the construction of a wall, Mexico will be reimbursing full cost 
Restoring Community Safety Act. 
Restoring National Security Act. Rebuilds our military 
Clean up Corruption in Washington Act. Enacts new ethics reforms to Drain the Swamp
