Donald Trump has put together an ambitious plan for a dramatic conservative reboot of the country during his first 100 days in office.
That gap between goals and reality is something all presidents face. 
But one of the keys to the president-elect’s job plan is his promise to put millions of Americans to work on a 10-year, $1 trillion effort to rebuild the country’s highways, bridges and airports. 
Trump’s pledge to immediately repeal the Affordable Care Act is an example of a promise that was easier to make than it will be to keep, said Henry Brady, dean of UC Berkeley’s Goldman School of Public Policy. While Republicans in Congress have voted more than 50 times to repeal Obamacare, problems could arise when it comes to actually dumping the plan.
“The first hundred days will be miserable (for Democrats) because it will be all about getting rid of whatever Obama has done,” said Bruce Cain, a political science professor at Stanford University. “Republicans will be dancing in the streets.”
Immigration: Since the day he began his campaign in June 2015, Trump has called for the construction of a hulking wall on the southern border and vowed that “Mexico will pay for it.”
Within his first 100 days in office, Trump has promised to introduce his “End Illegal Immigration Act,” which would fully fund the $12 billion-plus wall, “with the full understanding that the country Mexico will be reimbursing the United States for the full cost.”
On his own, Trump probably could change the rules on which immigrants are allowed to enter the country and begin deportation proceedings for what he says are 2 million or more undocumented residents who have committed crimes.
Environment: Trump, who has called global warming a hoax created by the Chinese, could quickly change the direction of U.S. environmental policy, especially with a Republican Congress that has regularly criticized Obama’s “green” efforts.
Trump has promised to lift restrictions on the Keystone XL pipeline that Obama killed, open up federal lands for oil drilling and coal mining, and eliminate environmental regulations he believes hurt business.
Trade: The president has plenty of direct control over trade policy, and Trump has said he’ll use that power.

He can end the country’s participation in the Trans-Pacific Partnership just by announcing the country’s withdrawal and pull out of the NAFTA pact with Mexico and Canada with six months’ notice.
Trump’s 100-day plan calls for his new commerce secretary to identify foreign trading abuses and “use every tool,” which could include tariffs, to end them immediately. He could immediately declare China a currency manipulator, and has talked about imposing a 45 percent tariff on Chinese goods.
Economists have warned that a trade war with Mexico and China, which account for 25 percent of U.S. international trade, could devastate the U.S. economy. An all-out trade war could result in as much as a 5 percent job loss in California and cost the country nearly 4.8 million private-sector jobs.
